Now with the basics of transition set, let's transition the backdrop too. Now
there, we'll face a special case which I want to show you. The backdrop which is selected with this backdrop
class selector still is shown by setting display none to display
block and this happens because we add the open class to the backdrop too when we select the plan for
example.
Now the problem we face is that in that open class,
we obviously changed the opacity and display to block and now we could think that we simply go to the
backdrop and also don't use display none to hide it but opacity zero instead.
Then we could add a transition where we watch the opacity and maybe over 200ms or .2s
which of course is the same value, we animate with a linear timing function so that we always move at the
same speed,
this is an approach we could take. If we now reload the page, we notice that we can't click choose plan anymore.
Now do you know why that happens?
This happens because the backdrop now only is invisible,
it's not not there. Now since it has a set index of 100,
it's actually in front of all the other elements even though we can't see it,
that is why we can't interact with any element on our page,
clearly an awful user experience.
Now of course the fix is easy, right?
We got our open CSS class selector here and we still set the display block there,
so all we got to do is go to that backdrop again and besides using the opacity, we can use display none
together with the opacity.
With that, we really remove it from the document flow and therefore if we reload, we can interact again.
However, if you watch closely, you might notice that the backdrop isn't really animated and
this becomes even clearer if we temporarily increase that to two seconds of a duration.
Now if we go back and click this plan, this doesn't look like a two second transition to me.
The reason for this is some special behavior.
If you change display, first of all you can't transition that display change,
so watching display won't work
and second of all, if you change the display from none to something else or the other way around, then
your transition isn't going to kick off
even if you're also changing some other property which normally would be animatable or transitionable, this
is super important to keep in mind. Now if you still want to ensure that this works in this case, you would
have to use some hacky workaround where in Javascript, you actually first of all set the backdrop style
to block, backdrop style
display is set to block and also the other way around for closing it,
so in all occasions where we actually have remove the open class, we set that to none
and that alone isn't enough,
so this isn't all we have to do,
instead we now also have to delay the start of the code where we add the open class,
we can do this with the Javascript set timeout method, there we pass a function which is executed after
a given timeout which can be very short, like 10ms, the 10 is a second argument means 10ms.
So after 10ms, this function gets executed
and there we actually should attach that open class.
So now we can copy that and also wrap that backdrop,
remove listener with it.
So here we want to remove that after 10ms
and what this does is, it ensures that we first of all set display to none or block, whatever we need
and then as a second step, we change that,
so we add this class or remove it.
This ensures that CSS doesn't change all the properties in one step and therefore omit the transition
but that it actually first of all changes the display which is the crucial part
and then it changes the other properties and hence also plays our transition.
So let's also add it up here where we have backdrop class list add open and with these changes in
place, now we should actually be able to reload our page and now we see a nice transition here.
Now of course, that's way too slow,
so now we can speed that up to not use 2s but .2s for that opacity transition
and now we get a transition on the backdrop too.
Definitely a bit hacky but a way of making this work if you need such a behavior and I wanted to share
this with you for that reason. Now one thing you might notice; for closing the backdrop, it disappears instantly
because I have an error in my code. For closing,
we of course first of all want to remove that open class and then once that is finished, we want to set
display to none. This has one important implication, for that closing function, the timeout, the delay for
which you want to wait has to match the delay of your transition or the duration of your transition
I should say. So since our transition takes 200ms, here that opacity transition on the backdrop,
we need to execute that function which removes the element from the document flow by setting display
to none after this 200ms
and that of course is a bit inconvenient because this means whenever you change the duration here on
your transition property, you also need to change it in your Javascript code.
This is still a workaround you can use, often
thankfully, you don't have a set up where you require this behavior,
if you do require it, keep this approach in mind. With these changes added,
now we can reload
and now we got a smooth transition for the backdrop as well for both cases; adding and removing it.
So this now is how we can make transitions work under all circumstances.